RFC-5313: Remove Metakey (#5313)
apache/opendal: core/src/docs/rfcs/5314_remove_metakey.md

- Proposal Name: `remove_metakey`
- Start Date: 2024-11-12
- RFC PR: [apache/opendal#5313](https://github.com/apache/opendal/pull/5313)
- Tracking Issue: [apache/opendal#5314](https://github.com/apache/opendal/issues/5314)

# Summary

Remove the `Metakey` concept from OpenDAL and replace it with a simpler and more predictable metadata handling mechanism.

# Motivation

The current `Metakey` design has several issues:

> 1. Performance Impact: Users often unknowingly trigger expensive operations (e.g., using `Metakey::Full` causes additional stat calls)
> 2. Usability Issues: Users frequently attempt to access metadata that wasn't explicitly requested
> 3. API Confusion: Overlap between `Metakey::Version` and the new `version(bool)` parameter
> 4. Implementation Complexity: Service developers find it challenging to implement `Metakey` correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Performance Impact: Users often initiate costly operations unintentionally, such as using `Metakey::Full`, which results in extra stat calls.
2. Usability Issues: Users often try to access metadata that hasn't been explicitly requested.
3. API Confusion: There's a conflict between `Metakey::Version` and the new `version(bool)` parameter.
4. Implementation Complexity: Service developers struggle to implement `Metakey` correctly.
```

> The expected outcome is a simpler, more predictable API that prevents common mistakes and improves performance by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal is a simpler, more intuitive API that prevents common mistakes and improves performance as standard.
```

# Guide-level explanation

Instead of using `Metakey` to specify which metadata fields to fetch, services will now declare their metadata capabilities upfront through a new `MetadataCapability` struct:

```rust
let entries = op.list("path").await?;
for entry in entries {
    if op.metadata_capability().content_type {
        println!("Content-Type: {}", entry.metadata().content_type());
    }
}
```

If users need additional metadata not provided by `list`:

```rust
let entries = op.list("path").await?;
for entry in entries {
    let mut meta = entry.metadata();

>     if !op.metadata_capability().etag {

Reviewer 2: Based on this usage, it seems to be the metadata capability of the `list` operation ?

        meta = op.stat(&entry.path()).await?;
    }
    println!("Content-Type: {}", meta.etag());
}
```

For existing OpenDAL users, the main changes are:

- Remove all `metakey()` calls from their code
- Use `metadata_capability()` to check available metadata
- Explicitly call `stat()` when needed

# Reference-level explanation

The implementation involves:

1. Remove the `Metakey` enum
2. Add new `MetadataCapability` struct:
```rust
pub struct MetadataCapability {
    pub content_length: bool,
    pub content_type: bool,
    pub last_modified: bool,
    pub etag: bool,
    pub mode: bool,
    pub version: bool,
    ...
}
```

3. Add method to Operator to query capabilities:
```rust
impl Operator {
    pub fn metadata_capability(&self) -> MetadataCapability;
}
```

> 4. Modify list operation to never perform implicit stat calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Modify list operation to avoid implicit stat calls
```

5. Update all service implementations to declare their metadata capabilities

Each service implementation will need to:
- Remove `Metakey` handling logic

> - Implement `metadata_capability()` to accurately reflect what metadata they provide by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement `metadata_capability()` to accurately indicate the metadata provided by default
```

- Ensure list operations return metadata that's always available without extra API calls

# Drawbacks

- Breaking change for existing users
- Loss of fine-grained control over metadata fetching
- Potential increased API calls if users need multiple metadata fields

# Rationale and alternatives

> This design is superior because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Prevents performance pitfalls by default

> - Makes metadata availability explicit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Makes metadata availability explicitly
```

- Simplifies service implementation
- Provides clearer mental model

Alternatives considered:
1. Keep `Metakey` but make it more restrictive

> 2. Add warnings for potentially expensive operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add warnings for potentially costly operations
```
